---
title: Magic, Science, and Disenchantment
author: the-wandmaker
date: 2023-11-22 11:11:00 +0100
categories: [Magic, Art, Science, Philosophy]
tags: [magic, science]
pin: true
math: true
image:
  path: /commons/tree-01.png
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,UklGRpoAAABXRUJQVlA4WAoAAAAQAAAADwAABwAAQUxQSDIAAAARL0AmbZurmr57yyIiqE8oiG0bejIYEQTgqiDA9vqnsUSI6H+oAERp2HZ65qP/VIAWAFZQOCBCAAAA8AEAnQEqEAAIAAVAfCWkAALp8sF8rgRgAP7o9FDvMCkMde9PK7euH5M1m6VWoDXf2FkP3BqV0ZYbO6NA/VFIAAAA
  alt: An AI generated image of an apple tree where the AI ignored a great majority of the prompt
---

I'll happily entertain the argument from someone who tells me that "magic is not real". Many things it seems are made from that which is not "real". So if by _real_ you mean tangible, well then certainly you are correct; magic is not tangible. If by _real_ you mean continuous and measurable, then certainly you are also correct; magic is not measurable. And if by _real_ you mean that it is not _true_... well then certainly you are correct; magic is enamored and thusly ill-influenced by deception.

Yet our lives are greatly shaped by the intangible. We experience the formless parts of the world daily and refer to them by a multitude of names. Thoughts and ideas exist in greater quantities than physical objects. Mathematicians have found it necessary to label certain numeric values as "real numbers" ($\mathbb{R}$), while others, such as the square root of negative one ($\sqrt{-1}$) remain... imaginary.

It is by countless example it becomes evident that the things that _"are" (eg. exist)_, are just as critical to our ability to understand the world as the things that _"are not"_. So, as we question ideas related to our world, our existence, and the mysteries of the universe, we may find ourselves in good company, for magic also asks these same questions.

## Disenchantment

In pursuit of knowledge, many paths may lead one to [disenchantment](https://www.britannica.com/topic/disenchantment-sociology), a lack of mystery, excitement, and meaning in the world that we are constructing around ourselves. This has befallen the domains of modern science, technology, and magic alike. A valid reaction and strategy for countering this is simply to turn down a different path, however it may not be long before once again disenchantment is encountered. An alternative is to choose to battle against disenchantment, and possibly to redirect it towards things that might benefit from being dis-empowered by it. Science and magic are often pitted against each other as if they were great rivals; psychology against spiritual encounters, physics against rituals, biology against connections with the natural world. The key is to get science and magic to work together in ways where they support one another's shortcomings.

The benefits of using magical and scientific lines of thought together may be best summarized by the science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke who said that "the only way of discovering the limits of the possible is to venture a little way past them into the impossible."[^hazards-of-prophecy]

Magical practices can be powerful tools for pushing past the limits of what is known. They can fuel discovery, creativity, new insights, and unlocked potential. A few examples of practices that also have relevant scientific theories to complement their magical ones may be useful to explore. This presentation may seem contrary to the idea of battling the disenchantment of the world, but I hope to make extraordinarily clear the distinction between a disenchanted world and a nonsense one. Arguably these are not examples of magic, but in a similar way I might show all of the tools in a laboratory and invite the researchers to present one measurable inkling of science. Where is the magic in a wand carved from a branch of elder? Or in the casting of a circle? Or the invocation of Osoronnōphris? Things are magical, just as instruments are scientific. There are tools and ideas and neither are the thing itself. When explained scientifically, the magic tends to hide.

## Meditation

Regularly engaging in a meditative practice directly results in changes to the structure and function of the brain. Benefits include "increases in gray matter and the left hippocampus [which] aid learning, cognition and memory [and] increases in the anterior insula and in cortical thickness benefit cognitive function, attention and self-awareness. [In meditation] you are essentially deactivating your sympathetic nervous system and turning on the parasympathetic branch, Rhoads says. Initial studies have found that over time this practice can help reduce pain, depression, stress and anxiety."[^meditation] The article I cite here is referring to studies into mindfulness meditation, but if you are like me, and find that mindfulness meditations leave you in a state entirely unsuited for resisting the pressures of the American 9 to 5 then rest assured that there are a prolific amount of alternative ways to meditate. I tend to prefer walking meditations where I become deeply engrossed in my thoughts, often losing track of my physical surroundings. Lately, I've been enjoying listening to "DEEP Theta Binaural Beats" (YouTube) with headphones while wearing "astral travel goggles". A lengthier explanation of both of these practices is most assuredly needed, and I'll perhaps devote a future article to the topic entirely.

## Divination

Various forms of [divination](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Divination) (such as tarot reading) often receive the scrutiny that they are random events to which meaning is ascribed - tending to reflect the view that someone desired to see in them. Psychology classifies this tendency as a form of [confirmation bias](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias). Tarot is especially scrutinized in the seemingly few academic studies that mention it. The level of scrutiny imposed on practices of divination is extremely intriguing to me. Although the post-witch-trial societal standard is to dismiss the existence of magic, legislation still exists to regulate tarot readings in a majority of US states. The least prohibitive of which often specify that readings are allowed for "entertainment purposes only". Alchemy was historically outlawed for similar reasons. The laws aimed to protect people from frauds and swindlers, yet at the same time we can imagine how the ability to create gold from base metals could be considered a serious threat to a gold-backed economy.

Equally, it should not be ignored that living one's life at the whim of a randomly drawn card will without doubt lead to utter devastation. It follows that grounded and realistic individuals are not using tarot cards to run their day-to-day affairs. An interesting trend has emerged in the discussions on tarot. Various magical practitioners are using tools like tarot as "brain hacks" that allow them to observe and introspect their possible confirmation biases and potentially overcome them; reflecting first on their interpretation of the card, and then on _why_ they came to that conclusion. Though we can reflect on our conscious thoughts, cognitive biases and forms of conditioning shape our behavior in an invisible way that is rarely immediately apparent. A 2017 study into overcoming confirmation bias noted the following:

> Wanting to make unbiased decisions wasn't enough. The "consider the opposite" participants, on the other hand, completely overcame the biased assimilation effect – they weren't driven to rate the studies which agreed with their preconceptions as better than the ones that disagreed, and didn't become more extreme in their views regardless of which evidence they read.
> 
> The finding is good news for our faith in human nature. It isn't that we don't want to discover the truth, at least in the microcosm of reasoning tested in the experiment. All people needed was a strategy which helped them overcome the natural human short-sightedness to alternatives.[^why-wont-some-people-listen-to-reason]

A common theme in confirmation bias studies is that prompting participants to consider specific alternatives has a significant effect, especially with specific instructional tools like "consider the opposite scenario" has proven effective whereas instructions like "be fair and impartial" fell short. Confirmation bias is an exceedingly complex subject, and further the symbolism and archetypes of tarot cards alone is likely an insufficient medium for reconciling it. But it does seem that the mind is often incapable of accessing certain information without the aid of external tools (see also, the [extended mind thesis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_mind_thesis) and related concepts).

As a practical example, if I've found myself with writers block while trying to write a story, then pulling a random card with the intention of getting a new idea for what might come next seems like a valid way to wield some creative chaos against the entropy of ideas.

## Belief

General arguments often relate the "power of belief" to the placebo effect. Assuming no other variables are at play (as a placebo is no substitute for proper medical treatment and real medicine) it would appear that reaping the seemingly free benefits of placebo effects provides an advantage over someone who simply chooses not to. Research suggests that there may not be a limit to what symptoms placebos can effect, and that "behavioral and neurobiological placebo effects are triggered by verbal suggestions, classical and nonclassical conditioning, and social interactions (including observation and complex interpersonal interactions)."[^placebo-effect] It could be tempting for the would-be sorcerer to compare these terms to spells (the written word), curses (the spoken word), and charms (a physical act). Likewise it is interesting to consider that many aversions to magic are fueled by near-religious adherence to scientific dogma, for who would dare dispute The One True Science?

It would seem that there might an arguable advantage to having a magical perspective of the world. This perspective grants one a tool with which they can free their thinking from many of the limits that we have been conditioned to have. To this extent I find myself shunning the phrasing of "belief in magic". As Austin Osman Spare pointed out, saying that you believe in something reveals your actual underlying disbelief. One does not say that they _believe_ in the sun, but many claim to _believe_ in a god. Ever going is the push and pull dance of expressions and perceptions; they are inexorably linked.

Science may one day explain the function of the mind in completeness, but this likely won't change the power that perceived truth and doubt hold over the mind. Those even slightly familiar with chaos magic will likely be aware of its discourse on the significance of ephemeral beliefs, and the ability of the magician to use belief as a tool.

## Perspective

The scientific and magical views of many subjects are not at odds with each other, but are in fact complementary and compatible views of the same world. Art is a medium through which the two might be unified: the alliance between magic and science in the battle against disenchantment. With art we may create magic and send it out into the world.

Scientific lines of thought claim a great advantage in arguments like these because science is the predominant and popular form of thought in our present era. This allows it to point out all of the flaws in magical lines of thinking with impunity. Admittedly, magical practices tend to get a bad reputation due to their historical ties with frauds and swindlers. Today it is easy to find examples of overpriced crystal schemes, books of nonsense, and the general unnecessary commodification of magical things. A scientific view of the world permits many the convenience of tossing out all non-conforming ideas.

The idea of an alliance between magical and scientific lines of thought often leads to the discussion of their unification: can science prove the existence of magic? As of the writing of this article my present understanding leads me to answer _no_. Science doesn't prove magic, it comes to the same conclusion in many cases. Yet magic must follow the laws of the natural world. I avoid here phrasings such as "the laws of physics" or "psychology" on the notion that those subjects are too specific and fail to fully encompass the extent in which magic falls somewhere between the mind and the physical. Magic must abide by certain rules that exist in our world, only if to create change by means of those rules. One might not be able to make men walk on water, but certainly there are those with skill to weave words that will build bridges. Likewise, there are others who might speak the same words with no effect.

In the end, perhaps it doesn't matter if magic exists, what matters is choice and outcome. I choose to wander in the woods while considering what secrets the trees might impart. I care to introspect my dreams, and subsequently find entertainment when they come true. I have read the words of writers whose names time has forgotten, scrawled in dusty tomes. By these words I have learned to create magical items, and with them, either by trade or other means used them to shape the physical world. It is for these very reasons that I believe it is crucial that we battle against disenchantment using art and science, as the conduits, anchors, and cornerstones of magic. Magic is a tool, accessible only by one's willingness to engage with it, a current of thought and outcomes unlike anything in existence that has great power for those who choose to initiate with it.

We lose something of great value when, in our quest to discover the mysteries of the universe, we discard its wonder. Society becomes devoid of culture, the meaningfulness of traditions are subverted by a consumer economy, and the slow unrelenting cadence of the game of daily life lulls us into contentment with the statuesque. It seems that very little is being done to build new cultural ideas develop art, and define a better world. I remain ever optimistic that each one of us possesses the innate power required to don the mantle of magic, and wield unspeakable, unreal, unequivocal power to create and shape this world for the better.

Vikki Bramshaw's WordPress blog sadly seems to have faded from existence, luckily the magic of the internet still holds some power to resurrect it for a relevant quotation:

> These aspects of the Craft, getting people to move with the seasons and the cycle of the moon, was key in getting people back in touch with nature; not in an airy fairy tree-hugging way!! but encouraging those who had lost touch with their rural understanding back to the land. It’s getting in tune with the seasonal changes, knowing how the tides are effected by the moon, knowing how in turn the moon effects our blood, knowing where our food comes from – and from a magical and ritual perspective, how all this can be used to our benefit.[^the-craft-and-its-mysteries]

With that, I leave the aspiring wizard, witch, warlock, or sorcerer with one final idea to consider. In how many ways can you accomplish the following? On a Wednesday at dawn carve yourself a staff from a branch of hickory taken from a tree that has never born fruit. You will then transform this staff into a bicycle, and with it you will fly to your next adventure!

***

[^hazards-of-prophecy]: "Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination" in the collection Profiles of the Future: An Enquiry into the Limits of the Possible (1962, rev. 1973), pp. 17.
[^meditation]: Boynton, E. (2020, 10 26). How Meditation Affects Your Brain and Boosts Well-Being. Right as Rain by UW Medicine. <https://rightasrain.uwmedicine.org/mind/well-being/science-behind-meditation>
[^why-wont-some-people-listen-to-reason]: BBC Future. How to get people to overcome their bias. <https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20170131-why-wont-some-people-listen-to-reason>
[^the-craft-and-its-mysteries]: Vikki Bramshaw. My Experiences, the Craft and its Mysteries. (2017, 09, 02) <https://web.archive.org/web/20170926191054/https://vikkibramshaw.wordpress.com/2017/09/02/my-experiences-the-craft-and-its-mysteries/>
[^placebo-effect]: Colloca, Luana. “The Placebo Effect in Pain Therapies.” Annual review of pharmacology and toxicology vol. 59 (2019): 191-211. doi:10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-010818-021542 <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6402571/>
