---
title: The Impertinent Fool
author: the-wandmaker
date: 2024-03-31 11:11:11 +0100
categories: [Articles, Magic]
tags: [magic, tarot, numerology]
pin: false
math: false
mermaid: false
image:
  path: /commons/2024-03-tarot-card-fool.png
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,UklGRpoAAABXRUJQVlA4WAoAAAAQAAAADwAABwAAQUxQSDIAAAARL0AmbZurmr57yyIiqE8oiG0bejIYEQTgqiDA9vqnsUSI6H+oAERp2HZ65qP/VIAWAFZQOCBCAAAA8AEAnQEqEAAIAAVAfCWkAALp8sF8rgRgAP7o9FDvMCkMde9PK7euH5M1m6VWoDXf2FkP3BqV0ZYbO6NA/VFIAAAA
  alt: An AI generated image of The Fool tarot card
---

At times, I like to consider an imaginary authoritative figure; The Supreme Ubermagus Prime, who is of the 999th degree, and hails from a magical order so ancient that it bares no true name. The Ubermagus has been imparted with sum total of esoteric wisdom, and will thus convey the knowledge such that left is bad and right is good, certain days of the month are better for traveling, and that various symbols have specific meanings. For each claim the Ubermagus makes, I ask _why_? (to which, the Ubermagus in growing exasperation, eventually exclaims, _"You impertinent fool!"_ For how dare I question the teachings of the Ubermagus?)

A skill that I have found valuable while exploring various esoteric topics is to question all vague and strange notions. Where does a certain idea come from? Why do people believe a given claim to be true? Often, a long repeated phrase turns out to be backed by a conceptual structure that is more malleable than its derivatives. It is excellent to know the meaning of various symbols, but would it not be of more use to understand the systems by which those symbols were derived? With the latter, one has the skill set to create their own symbolic concepts and expand upon existing frameworks.

An environment of learning is a sacred space, one even an Ubermagus cannot deny the sanctity of. Outside of this space, society entrains us to fear to expose a gap in our own knowledge, it ascribes to that characteristic negative connotations of ignorance and weakness. But inside the circle, any good fool will soon realize there is a powerful and transformative force that can be harnessed by asking questions.

## Discussing the Impossible

When it comes to the vast array of esoteric concepts that exist, limits should never be imposed on the ability of someone to question a claim. Although it should be acknowledged that some inexplicable things truly cannot be explained, there should always be an avenue by which we can discuss _why_ something cannot be explained. If we can't discuss a topic, nor have others understand how a conclusion was reached, then there is likely missing or inaccurate information. Sustainable concepts may bend under the weight of relentless questioning, but poorly constructed ones will collapse entirely.

Popularly quoted on a rage of science-themed podcasts, is the Sagan standard, or that "extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence". This aphorism, while it does have its merits, encourages a conflation between _evidence_ and _explanation_, the difference being that an explanation may suffice with zero evidence and likewise be judged within the context that it is presented. Furthermore, the statement forces a claim into further quantification, ironic considering the Sagan standard has no quantitative criteria itself. When we place skepticism at the forefront of qualifying new ideas for further consideration we risk letting our own imagination guess the price of evidence that should be required to back the claim.

As a brief examination of economic effects, consider then that there is often a strict cost required to gather evidence, explanations on the other hand are only bounded by comprehension. There is a further implication here that economies will drive what we have evidence of, and that there is a bias to ignore ideas the originate in poorer communities. When we discuss the extraordinary and the impossible, it is imperative that we judge the concept in terms of the soundness of its explanation, the steep cost of extraordinary evidence can seldom be paid up front.

Any subject considered to be "esoteric" is, by its very nature, something which rests hidden in the shadows of conventional understanding. Economic logic rationalized the the status-quo to be maintained, so perhaps it will only ever be foolish who venture into the darkness wielding the light of inquiry.

## Examples

Here are a few fun examples for any other impertinent fools out there.

(Examples to be added later)
