---
title: True Names and Moon Phases
author: the-wandmaker
date: 2024-02-10 11:11:11 +0100
categories: [Articles, Folklore]
tags: [magic, symbolism, folklore, language]
pin: false
math: true
mermaid: false
image:
  path: /commons/2024-02-true-names.png
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,UklGRpoAAABXRUJQVlA4WAoAAAAQAAAADwAABwAAQUxQSDIAAAARL0AmbZurmr57yyIiqE8oiG0bejIYEQTgqiDA9vqnsUSI6H+oAERp2HZ65qP/VIAWAFZQOCBCAAAA8AEAnQEqEAAIAAVAfCWkAALp8sF8rgRgAP7o9FDvMCkMde9PK7euH5M1m6VWoDXf2FkP3BqV0ZYbO6NA/VFIAAAA
  alt: An AI generated image of a wizard trying to name things
---

As someone who genuinely enjoys writing and sharing ideas with others, it somewhat pains me to admit that words don't really matter. Words have an intrinsic connection to the objects they relate to. This connection allows us to discuss the object, and coordinate with others about it. But make no mistake, it is this underlying connection that is key, and not the word itself. Words on their own, are meaningless, and countless examples of this can be demonstrated. Terms fade in and out of use, one word might become recognized as an insult, while at the same time a previously oppressive term is reclaimed by the people it had afflicted. With a meaningless sound of exasperation we can express to someone _"exactly"_ what we mean, while at the same time a commonly recognized phrase will be "sorry, that's not what I meant", spouted as someone realizes that they've failed to connect the right words to an object they wish to share.

Names are a special type of word, governed similarly by the constraints of language, but at the same time possessing their own unique properties. Names hold power. Our names become a part of our identity, they link to us. And in general, knowing the names of people, places, and things, gives you a greater ability to communicate with others, it provides you the power of precision when it comes to your ability to share an idea and communicate it concisely.

## True Names

Rumpelstiltskin was amongst the stories that I grew up listening to. This was before films like the Shrek sequels, Once Upon a Time, and even an episode of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, revived the character within the modern cinematic spotlight. I genuinely wish that I had a recording, or a typed version of the (canonically inaccurate but still excellent) version of Rumpelstiltskin that my grandmother had told me on a number of the mornings when she drove me into school. Amongst the other stories I remember were one about a lost goose, and another about snake that lived in the basket that rested on the backset of her Ford station wagon. But those stories are beside the point, lets get back to Rumpelstiltskin...

The secret needed to defeat Rumpelstiltskin is to know is name! For anyone concerned with that plot points (as my childhood self was) this is an important detail. Similar to this are themes involving the significance of names in folklore from around the world, the story of Rumpelstiltskin is simply the one I'm most familiar with and therefore the one I've chosen to focus on in this piece. Others might recognized the [secret name of Re](https://mythfolklore.blogspot.com/2014/06/egypt-secret-name-of-ra.html) as significant in Egyptian mythology, or the stroy of [Saint Olaf and the Troll](https://avaldsnes.info/en/olavskirken/olavssegner/) from Norwegian mythology. In other contexts, True Names might also be seen as related to the idea of the true names of God (or other deities), which in many cases are believed to be both a link to that spirit and have a wide range of mystical powers.

The concept of a "True Name" varies between different contexts of folklore, systems of magic, and culture. On the most general level it might be defined as a type of name that is unchanging and directly linked to something. I tend to think of this as being similar to the idea of mathematical constants which are directly tied to unchangeable aspects of the universe. Some notable constants include $\pi$ (3.14159...), which corresponds to the circumference of a circle with a diameter of 1, the symbol $c$ used to denote the speed of light in vacuum (299,792,458 metres per second), or Planck's constant, denoted by $h$ and equal to $6.62607015 \times 10^{-34}$ $J \cdot Hz^{−1}$, which represents the amount of energy that a photon will increase by when the frequency of its electromagnetic wave increases by 1. Regardless of where someone stands in the universe, these values do not change.

The idea of a True Name having a relationship to an object is intriguing within the bounds of its similarity to mathematical concepts, and in terms of its more magical aspects there is a notion that knowing the True Name of something provides one with some sort of power over it. This, I believe, can be a key tool when it comes to how we interact with the world. If we recognize the power of words, and the significance of names, then we do in many ways gain more control over the world around us. Our ability to communicate allows us to coordinate with other people in our world to shape and change it. Names tie together the specific people, identities, and types of materials we can interact with, and True Names may very well be a part of the core expression of words and their meanings.

While words may be tied to our effects on the world, there is yet another component that may be equally, if not more important: listening. Despite all that can be said, everything we know comes from our ability to stop and observe our soundings.

## Observing the Moon Phase

Depending on where you are in the world, and what your daily life is like, it can be easy to become disconnected from your environment. The artificial cycles of a daily commute to work and back, and the weekly endeavor to get to the weekend, can make it challenging to remain in touch with the beautiful and soothing natural cycles that surround us.

One Autumn morning years ago, while on my way to work I suddenly noticed that all of the trees were ablaze with their fall colors. Now it's not that they abruptly changed color over night, I had simply been so focused on getting to work in the morning (and not seeing the colors at night when I left) that I had failed to observe them changing. It has been my endeavor since, to make sure that I never again fail to notice things like this.

For me, keeping an awareness of the current phase of the moon is of the simple ways I try to remain connected to the parts of the world that I prefer to live my life for. I closely associate the moon with both timing, as well as those moments that should exist apart from time (such as loosing track of ones self while gazing up at the night sky).

Symbols only ever have as much power as they're given, and moon phases do have strong associated symbolism. But I think observing natural symbols like the moon can serve as a reminder to exercise our powers of perception. Be observant, listen to the world, and watch it move.

The moon's gravitation doesn't exclusively effect the Earth's tides, more than half of the human body is water. As the sun and moon continue their daily chase across the sky, and the moon phase waxes and wanes, it is perhaps relevant to consider how our brains are highly effected by different levels of light. All we have to do is look up for a brief moment to be reminded that literal cosmic forces hold influence over our physical existence.

When you are aware of your soundings you have an advantage. This can range from having more opportune timing (planting crops, or simply avoiding getting caught in the rain), to awareness of the tools and resources around you.

## Magical Agency

Amidst the multifaceted symbolic significance of True Names and moon phases is a simple truth that resides at the fulcrum between these active and passive principles. Plainly put, "know stuff and do stuff" is my own crude way of summing up this idea (and is possibly an over-simplified version of "[to know, to will, to dare, to keep silent](https://therhetoricofmagic.com/magic/the-four-powers-of-the-sphinx-know-will-dare-keep-silent/)", otherwise known as the powers of the Sphinx, or the powers of the Megus).

But what do we really mean when we talk about the "power" a person has? _Having power_, especially in a magical sense, elicits imagery of sorcerer waving a staff over their head to send bolts of lightning hurtling towards their enemies. In reality, power is seldom so grandiose. It is through true names and moon phases, or perhaps rather, the connection of words to meaning in combination with awareness and proper timing, through which one may have the opportunity to grapple with the reigns of fate. Regardless of one's objectives, it is advantageous to know more about how the world works, and the current state of that world because that gives you more power to operate and have agency within it. There is an art to perfecting the skill of balancing active application of knowledge and passive observations. Benefits can be found both outwardly with physical resources and interactions, or inwardly in terms of knowing thyself. _"To know thyself is the beginning of wisdom", as Socrates put it._

We can think of a person's agency in terms of the degree of freedom with which they are able to move in the world. If life were a board game, then someone with greater agency has the ability to jump further on the board, and move in directions that others cannot. At the highest level these players may perhaps debate the very rules of the game with the championship referees, or define new rules altogether. The power of these players comes from their deep understanding of the game (or perhaps alternatively, to have the resources to afford to rent these skills from others). Either way, that last move wasn't them teleporting pieces around the board, that was a well-planned [king side castle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Castling). More practical then chess analogies, a realistic example might be someone who can speak more than one language. This person will have more access to written materials, digital media, they'll be able to connect with more people, and possibly travel to more places with ease.

No one correct way to 'know things and do things' exists. Although it might be observed that having a diverse collection of knowledge, coupled with doing many different things presents a proportionately greater number of realizable directions. Know the names of trees based on their bark and leaves, as well as the names of different electrical components. Be aware of the current phase of the moon, but observe also the actions of those around you. Have a connection with the world and observe it, because disconnected our power becomes greatly limited.
