---
title: Maps to Places That Don't Exist
author: the-wandmaker
date: 2024-01-13 01:13:00 +0100
categories: [Articles, Art]
tags: [magic, art, symbolism]
pin: false
math: false
mermaid: false
image:
  path: /commons/2024-01-world.png
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,UklGRpoAAABXRUJQVlA4WAoAAAAQAAAADwAABwAAQUxQSDIAAAARL0AmbZurmr57yyIiqE8oiG0bejIYEQTgqiDA9vqnsUSI6H+oAERp2HZ65qP/VIAWAFZQOCBCAAAA8AEAnQEqEAAIAAVAfCWkAALp8sF8rgRgAP7o9FDvMCkMde9PK7euH5M1m6VWoDXf2FkP3BqV0ZYbO6NA/VFIAAAA
  alt: An AI generated image of a sorceress visiting a strange alien world
---

> It is not down in any map; true places never are.
> 
> ~ Herman Melville, Moby-Dick[^herman-melville]

Maps often instill one with a sense of courage, or intrigue. Whether they are geographical, or diagrams of some other intricate subject, they represent something that we intend to acknowledge some level of sureness towards. A map of an area we are unfamiliar with, if accurate, gives us the ability to navigate that uncertain terrain. Likewise, a map of the structure of atoms gives us the ability to understand and communicate with one another the various ideas related to how that infinitesimal particle might interact with other particles on a scale invisible to the unaided human eye.

Any map, model, or diagram exists with an intent to represent something, and yet inherently acknowledges a necessary degree of inaccuracy. As resolutions are decreased and some extraneous information is removed, simplified charts become easier to understand. Its not that we are creating models that poorly represent our world, but rather that we are representing the components we believe to be important for discussion and understanding.

Aside from their usefulness, many maps are quite beautiful. In many ways the abstractions used in maps are not altogether separate from concepts of abstract art. A definition provided by Rise Art states that "Abstract art is art that does not represent an accurate depiction of visual reality, communicating instead through lines, shapes, colours, forms and gestural marks. Abstract artists use a variety of techniques to create their work, mixing traditional means with more experimental ideas."[^abstract-art]

With these ideas in mind, I have been endeavoring to sketch out a series I'm calling "Maps to Places That Don't Exist". Admittedly, "not existing" isn't exactly accurate for some of the places I've featured so far, many of them exist but are simply intangible. One of the first concepts I started working with was the idea of dreams. Although dreams aren't physically real, they are still something that we can recognize as an experience. Additionally, dreams occur in our brains, which means that in a certain sense they do exist in a finite physical space in the world. Similar to the brain as a place where ideas exist, I've also been considering the concept of internet spaces. Online communities, multi-player games, and countless other virtual locations represent intangible cities and cultures that don't exist in the physical world.

My hope with these sketches it to explore ways to represent the connection between people and objects that physically exist, and the less tangible, more conceptual parts of our world. Diagrams that also consider the person perceiving them, explorations of the fluidity of memory, and incorporations of interesting geometric figures such as one-sided [Mobius strip](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%B6bius_strip) or the theoretical shape of the [Klein bottle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klein_bottle) are just a few of the places that I hope to touch upon.

Further inspiration has come from the Latin phrase "hic sunt dracones", or _here there be dragons_ appears more frequently in modern maps that seek to give the appearance of being old. Yet there are examples of the inclusion of phrases like this, as well as images of dragons and sea serpents on medieval maps. These were used to denote uncharted and unknown areas. There is something undeniably intriguing about the idea of dragons occupying these mysterious, somewhat liminal spaces beyond what is known. In part, there is also a sense of nostalgia around the idea of a treasure map and searching for buried loot. In these ways maps capture imagination and represent adventure, where they lead might be less important than how they make people think and feel.

***

[^abstract-art]: Rise Art. "What is Abstract Art? The Complete Guide". <https://www.riseart.com/guide/2366/guide-to-abstract-art>
[^herman-melville]: Herman Melville, "Moby-Dick", <https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2701>
