---
title: The Impertinent Fool
author: the-wandmaker
date: 2024-03-31 11:11:11 +0100
categories: [Articles, Magic]
tags: [magic, tarot, numerology]
pin: false
math: false
mermaid: false
image:
  path: /commons/2024-03-tarot-card-fool.png
  lqip: data:image/webp;base64,UklGRpoAAABXRUJQVlA4WAoAAAAQAAAADwAABwAAQUxQSDIAAAARL0AmbZurmr57yyIiqE8oiG0bejIYEQTgqiDA9vqnsUSI6H+oAERp2HZ65qP/VIAWAFZQOCBCAAAA8AEAnQEqEAAIAAVAfCWkAALp8sF8rgRgAP7o9FDvMCkMde9PK7euH5M1m6VWoDXf2FkP3BqV0ZYbO6NA/VFIAAAA
  alt: An AI generated image of The Fool tarot card
---

At times, I like to consider an imaginary authoritative figure; The Supreme Ubermagus Prime, who is of the 999th degree, and hails from a magical order so ancient that it bares no true name. The Ubermagus has been imparted with sum total of esoteric wisdom, and will thus convey the knowledge such that left is bad and right is good, certain days of the month are better for traveling, and that various symbols have specific meanings. For each claim the Ubermagus makes, I ask _why_? (to which, the Ubermagus in growing exasperation, eventually exclaims, _"You impertinent fool!"_ For how dare I question the teachings of the Ubermagus?)

A skill that I have found valuable while exploring various esoteric topics is to question all vague and strange notions. Where does a certain idea come from? Why do people believe a given claim to be true? Often, a long repeated phrase turns out to be backed by a conceptual structure that is more malleable than its derivatives. It is excellent to know the meaning of various symbols, but would it not be of more use to understand the systems by which those symbols were derived? With the latter, one has the skill set to create their own symbolic concepts and expand upon existing frameworks.

An environment of learning is a sacred space, one even an Ubermagus cannot deny the sanctity of. Outside of this space, society entrains us to fear to expose a gap in our own knowledge, it ascribes to that characteristic negative connotations of ignorance and weakness. But inside the circle, any good fool will soon realize there is a powerful and transformative force that can be harnessed by asking questions.

## Discussing the Impossible

When it comes to the vast array of esoteric concepts that exist, limits should never be imposed on the ability of someone to question a claim. Although it should be acknowledged that some inexplicable things truly cannot be explained, there should always be an avenue by which we can discuss _why_ something cannot be explained. If we can't discuss a topic, nor have others understand how a conclusion was reached, then there is likely missing or inaccurate information. Sustainable concepts may bend under the weight of relentless questioning, but poorly constructed ones will collapse entirely.

Popularly quoted on a rage of science-themed podcasts, is the Sagan standard, or that "extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence". This aphorism, while it does have its merits, encourages a conflation between _evidence_ and _explanation_, the difference being that an explanation may suffice with zero evidence and likewise be judged within the context that it is presented. Furthermore, the statement forces a claim into further quantification, ironic considering the Sagan standard has no quantitative criteria itself. When we place skepticism at the forefront of qualifying new ideas for further consideration we risk letting our own imagination guess the price of evidence that should be required to back the claim.

As a brief examination of economic effects, consider then that there is often a strict cost required to gather evidence, explanations on the other hand are only bounded by comprehension. There is a further implication here that economies will drive what we have evidence of, and that there is a bias to ignore ideas the originate in poorer communities. When we discuss the extraordinary and the impossible, it is imperative that we judge the concept in terms of the soundness of its explanation, the steep cost of extraordinary evidence can seldom be paid up front.

Any subject considered to be "esoteric" is, by its very nature, something which rests hidden in the shadows of conventional understanding. Economic logic rationalized the the status-quo to be maintained, so perhaps it will only ever be foolish who venture into the darkness wielding the light of inquiry.

## Examples

Here are a few fun examples for any other impertinent fools out there. I've tried to stick mostly to links and quotes for these, so you can dig deeper and don't need to take my word for it.

### Tibetan Singing Bowls

> Academic consensus is that the ‘Tibetan’ singing bowl is a thoroughly modern and Western invention, and that singing bowls are really not Tibetan at all.
> 
> ~ https://savageminds.org/2015/10/31/tripping-on-good-vibrations-cultural-commodification-and-tibetan-singing-bowls/

> The objects often now referred to as 'Tibetan singing bowls', and marketed as Tibetan ritual instruments, have been called "dharma products" that in fact come from northern India or Nepal, and are neither Tibetan nor ritual in origin.
> 
> ~ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standing_bell

### Runic Divination Meanings

If you've ventured into any esoteric shop recently you've likely seen sets of runes etched on wood or stone and accompanied by a small book or pamphlet that describes how to cast them and what each rune means. But where did these meanings originate from?

> In 1982, a modern usage of the runes for answering life's questions was apparently originated by Ralph Blum in his divination book The Book of Runes: A Handbook for the Use of an Ancient Oracle, which was marketed with a small bag of round tiles with runes stamped on them. This book has remained in print since its first publication. The sources for Blum's divinatory interpretations, as he explained in The Book of Runes itself, drew heavily on then-current books describing the ancient I Ching divination system of China.
> 
> ~ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Runes

As it currently stands, there are limited historical accounts that describe the method by which runes were used for divination. The details of these practices were likely passed through oral tradition and have been lost to history. One of the more complete, yet still vague descriptions comes from the Roman historian and politician, Cornelius Tacitus.

> Their method of divining by lots is exceeding simple. From a
tree which bears fruit they cut a twig, and divide it into two small
pieces. These they distinguish by so many several marks, and throw them
at random and without order upon a white garment. Then the Priest of the
community, if for the public the lots are consulted, or the father of
a family if about a private concern, after he has solemnly invoked the
Gods, with eyes lifted up to heaven, takes up every piece thrice, and
having done thus forms a judgment according to the marks before made.
> 
> [Tacitus on Germany, Cornelius Tacitus](https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/2995)

> As a side note, the detail about fruit-bearing trees is one of the reasons that I like to work with woods like apple.
{: .prompt-info }

### Lucky Number 7

The significance of the number 7 is ancient, and has many counts attributed to it, but its positive association is likely astronomical in origin.

> ... for as the moon changes its phases every seven days, so this number influences all sublunary beings. The phrase "to be in the seventh heaven" was derived from the seven planets, which were believed by the Babylonians to be carried around upon as many globes of crystal, the seventh being the highest. In the writings of the Cabalists of old are likewise portrayed seven heavens, one above another, and the seventh or highest was the abode of God and the higher angels.
> 
> [The Magic of the Horse-Shoe, Robert Means Lawrence, 1898](https://sacred-texts.com/etc/mhs/mhs68.htm)

### Lucky and Unlucky Days

In old almanacs and grimoirs, it is possible to come across lists and tables of various dates labeled as lucky or unlucky, or as being more or less suitable for a certain type of endeavour. These lists are often provided with little to no explanation from the text's original author. One such example that comes to mind is The Book of Forbidden Knowledge, a small and relatively mundane grimiore published around 1910.

In general, it seems that humans have broadly attributed positive or negative sentiments to various days throughout all eras and regions of the world. In modern work culture it is generally agreed upon that Mondays are unfortunate in one way or another, perhaps it is view of the daunting week ahead, or possibly it is something else entirely, rooted deep in human culture. In fact, the idea of lucky and unlucky days dates as far as ancient Babylonia where calendar months were 30 days timed to start at the same time as the new moon. But the approximate 29.5 day cycle of the moon doesn't perfectly line up, so some months would "start early" on what was technically the last day of the previous month, and [these days were considered unlucky](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Babylonian_calendar#cite_note-britton-3).

But further revisions would need to be made to the calendar:

> During the reign of the Babylonian king Nabonasser (traditionally dated between 747 and 734 B.C.E.) priest/ astronomers in that country discontinued their practice of looking for the new moon in order to name the beginning of a month. Instead, they returned to a fixed-length calendar that had 12 months of 30 days each, but with five days added at the end.
> 
> Usually at a date later than the mid-eighth century B.C.E., many other peoples who had previously considered the year to be 360 days in length reluctantly returned to a calendar of twelve 30-day months, but added five days to the end of their year. These additional days were considered to be very unlucky or unpropitious.
> ~ https://www.webexhibits.org/calendars/calendar-ancient.html

But in addition to some of the earliest origins of superstitions regarding various days, there are a number of more succinct and well known lists that may commonly be seen unreferenced in some of these older texts:

**Egyptian days** - These were generally thought to be days of the year when various historical or mythological events had taken place in Egypt. The associations were popularized during the middle ages.

* https://sacred-texts.com/etc/mhs/mhs50.htm
* https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/030751332601200144?journalCode=egaa
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Egyptian_days

**Tycho Brahe days** (yeah, that Tycho Brahe... [the 16th century astronomer who's moose drank too much beer at one of his famous parties](https://www.mentalfloss.com/article/50409/tycho-brahe-astronomer-drunken-moose))

* These days are attributed to Tycho Brahe, although there is no evidence of him ever writing them down.
* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tycho_Brahe_days

**Roman Superstitions** - A number of superstitions about days can be found through ancient rome.

  > The day after a kalends, nones, or ides was also often expressed as the "day after" (postridie) owing to their special status as particularly unlucky "black days".
  > https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_calendar

* https://sacred-texts.com/etc/mhs/mhs51.htm

**Friday the 13th**

* https://sacred-texts.com/etc/mhs/mhs55.htm

### Making a wish at 11:11

> Some believe the "ones" in the angel number 1111 signify new beginnings. 1111 signals the start of a new journey or that you are already on the right path. When you see 1111 as a time, or on a license plate, a house number, a phone number, etc., angels are trying to convey a message to you. The angels are signaling that a good and positive change in your life is to occur soon and that you should have faith in this message and act for a happy outcome.
> https://www.farmersalmanac.com/1111-good-luck-and-history

But wait... what is an "angel number"? The term was likely coined by Doreen Virtue and used in a number of her publications made between 1995 and 2015.

> Doreen Virtue is a woman who claims she studied under Pythagoras in a past life.
> ...
> She has since transformed her energy into following the Christian path and worked to have her name removed from nearly all of her previously published works.
> 
> ~ https://subconsciousservant.com/who-invented-angel-numbers/

Definitions of numbers: https://www.allure.com/story/what-are-angel-numbers

> As an aside, palindromic numbers and words have a long history of magical significance, they literally cannot have their meaning reversed.
{: .prompt-info }

### Left is bad and right is good

Part of the symbolic associations related to left and right may often derive from [dexter (right) and sinister (left)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dexter_and_sinister) sides of coat of arms designs. The right side was formally the fighting side of the knight and therefore associated with strength and honor. But in other cases these symbolisms originate in tantric concepts:

> The Western use of the terms left-hand path and right-hand path originated with Madame Blavatsky, a 19th-century occultist who founded the Theosophical Society. She had traveled across parts of southern Asia and gave accounts of having met with many mystics and magical practitioners in India and Tibet. She developed the term left-hand path as a translation of the term vamachara, an Indian Tantric practice that emphasized the breaking of Hindu societal taboos
> 
> https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Left-hand_path_and_right-hand_path
